Okay, let's go. Okay, I'm ready. Enough about 2001
nights. Now, first of all, I should like to know
what interested you in oceanography.
Specifically, you mean? Specifically,
yeah. Well, my first real involvement in
oceanography was during World War II with surf and
beaches. working out of the University of
California on landing craft, performance of
waves, depths. That was my first actual
scientific involvement, 1945, I guess, 44, or
thereabouts.
More generally, of course, I'd been interested in
oceanography or in the oceans quite a long time
before that. I was a commercial fisherman for
three years off the Oregon coast and always was
since childhood was interested in the oceans and
got a great thrill out of fishing in a surf or off the
boat or out of a skiff. When were you a commercial
fisherman? About 1936 to 39. I have you at Oregon
State University from 30 to 41. That's about
right. Took me about that long to get through. But I
don't have you receiving a degree. I didn't. I got a
degree at Berkeley. That's right. What did you do
at Oregon State University? Oh, I took things as
long as I could stand it, and then did something
else. I joined and went in the Forestry Service,
worked in the Three C's, the Resettlement
Administration, worked as a logger, went
fishing, then go back to school. Fortunately, I
sort of kept up my academic record there at
reasonably respectable levels. It was a It was a
good experience because it allowed me to take all
kinds of different subjects, which I always felt I
profited from. Engineering, science,
literature.
Much better, I think, than in my particular case,
than going straight through school in some sort of
rigorous curriculum. Was it economic pressure or
the depression that sent you to these various
jobs, or was it just wanderlust?
I was all three plus my poor handling of my finances
at various times, such finances as they were
possible in those days. And did you primarily
concentrate on science while you were at Oregon
State or just? Yeah, science, math, I took quite a
bit of literature, history, paleontology,
engineering, chemistry, chemical engineering.
Do you think this sort of broad education is
necessary for scientists? I think this kind of
broad education is essential if we're going to
solve our problems. We have to have both
penetrating minds and broadly comprehensive
ones. People who have broad interests And I would
take exception to your point, education, because
I think a person who's broadly interested will
educate themselves into these broader areas. But
the whole idea that science is going to make its
breakthroughs and understanding of the universe
and man's position in it from narrow approaches
versus is balderdash. It's got to have both,
narrowly penetrating approaches and very
broadly comprehensive ones. Science, of course,
has capitalized the last few centuries on taking
things apart. And now it's clear the problem of
putting things together. And that's going to take
people who have looked at all the parts spread
around the floor, you see. We're much in the
position of a 12-year-old stating the TV apart on
the kitchen floor, you know, without seeing quite
how it was together in the first place in our
science. I noticed when you go to Berkeley, you
major in engineering. That's what your degree is,
a BS in engineering. The fastest degree I could
get. Oh, okay. Was there such a thing as marine
engineering then? No, no, no. Well, there was
marine engineering, but that's boat building
type of thing. Old-fashioned marine
engineering, yeah. No, I took civil. Okay. And
expediency steered you in this direction? No, I
had... The reason I took engineering is early in
the war, just before the war, I took a job as
surveyor on a big naval base and rather rapidly
became the chief engineer without any
engineering training. And this interested me
quite a bit, several factors. First, engineering
was interesting, which is only applied physics,
really. And secondly, the fact I could do that well
without any formal engineering training seemed
to me to indicate that that might be my fork. And so I
thought, why not get an engineering degree from
the best engineering school? So I did so. What were
your career goals when you received an
engineering degree? My career goals were to do...
I mean, when I did that, I thought I was going to be an
engineer. I truly did. My grandfather had been an
engineer and charge of the Harriman lines, chief
engineer for the Harriman lines. My father had
been chief engineer for the Canadian Pacific. And
I'd always been told I was going to be an engineer,
and I always had resented it and refused to
consider it. And at this time, I decided, yeah,
that's what I'm going to be. Then when I went out
looking for a job, they all sounded being the
sectional engineer at Dunsmuir or something like
that. I went back and asked Dean O'Brien if I
couldn't do some research in the engineering
department, and that's where I got started on the
waves, beaches, and surf. Oh, okay. That's where I
first met Ravel, too. Where, here? No, on the
waves, beaches, and surf. Oh, okay. That's what he
said. I was shocked all of a sudden when you
introduced him. Something that didn't work out.
Do you ever regret having not taken a higher
degree? Do I ever regret it? No, I don't think so.
I'm often told to make sure I never get one because
it's a phenomenon to have somebody and not have
one, you see. Do you think failure to earn one has
limited your career, if I may use that word? I don't
know. I haven't really thought about it a hell of a
lot. It's never worried me anyway. Let me try it a
different way. Does it seem to you as if the
movement towards professional degrees since
World War II, when in effect graduate degrees have
become essential to the various academic
professions, do you think that's potentially a
mistake? Well, I think I would have progressed
farther and accomplished less, or I could have
progressed farther by accomplishing less, let me
say, if I'd had a higher degree there. statement.
Yeah. No, what strikes me is there are all kinds of
historians and scientists who come out of World
War II with either no degrees or BA degrees who
accomplish a great deal. That ends someplace in
the 50s as society becomes more technical. And
yet, in a way, it doesn't seem to be as creative now
as it once was. Would you agree with that? Well, I
don't know. The pros and cons about the higher
degrees, it tends to be a document that is an
entree, of course. And I one time had a student who
was, I thought, quite dull. And I tried to persuade
him to forget and get a higher degree. And he said,
you mean all those five years of work is wasted? And
I said, you mean you didn't learn anything? I said,
what were you doing? It can't be wasted. And he
stopped for a minute, and then he said the most
intelligent thing he's ever said. He says, you
know, Dr. Isaacs, which was an interesting
statement in itself, I'm just not smart enough to
get anywhere without a PhD.
And he wasn't, that's for sure. So you see, the PhD,
it seems to me, and the higher degrees have their
pros and cons associated with them. now i want to
break away from chronology for a second and i want
you to describe and give the significance of these
things i've listed good heavens okay and uh and now
first of all before i begin where did as an engineer
were you asked to solve specialized problems is
this what accounts for this list of inventions or
As a matter of fact, did these come to you? You're
telling me now that you're going to give me a list of
inventions. Yes, that's right. No, I always
selected my own problems first. And people didn't
come to you with research problems and say, how
would you as an engineer solve this? Sometimes.
Sometimes, all right. Sure. Well, if that
happened in the process. Folks came to me and asked
me about how you'd make a mid-water trawl frame.
Right. Well, if that occurred in the process of
mentioning these, would you explain who came to
you and what were the circumstances, too,
involved? Sure. Good heavens, that sounds like an
endless list. No, I only listed 12 or 13, just not
all of them, as a matter of fact. 1945, a device for
traversing surf zones and beaches. Oh. Well, I was
working then on amphibious craft and several
aspects. How in the devil did you get a line out
through these tremendous surfs of Northern
California and Oregon and Washington? Well, you
could shoot one out. And I would watch during the
war boats come in, land on the beach, get
broadside, swamped, and somebody trying to get a
line through to pull them off or help them one way or
another. And they get broached and swamped and so
forth. So wouldn't it be nice if you could just send
a line out? Now, wouldn't it be nice if you could put
something in the surface that would take an
instrument out there so you could measure the
waves, or put a rod on it and measure the surface? So
it's obvious that waves have plenty of power to do
this kind of thing. So you make a flap, and you
rectify the wave so that the forces are only out,
and you put it together. And he said, no, nobody
came to me on that one, of course. Okay. Does your
work with this lead you later on to working with...
Wave power, wave propulsion, sure. Sure, years
later. Also understanding something about
undertow and worrying about sand motion, quite a
few things. All right. And this began in effect
from a military project. Yeah, a military project
of understanding amphibious craft. Okay. Would
you... adjudge the military, if I may say that, to
play a sizable role in the development and
advancement of oceanography in this period?
Well, of course. The ONR, which was Revelle's
baby, was, of course, a powerful influence and a
very, very valuable one. One of the best sponsors
of research that ever existed. I was also thinking
possibly about experience gained in things like
in anti-submarine warfare, for example, in
anti-mine activities. Sure. A lot of those things
have worked out.
You really have to look at the environment of a
submarine. And this gives you, I think, requires
considerable thought into just exactly what is
the meaning of placing this object in the ocean and
its influences on it. Some of that, of course,
classified material. the mine itself, the object
on the bottom, the manner in which scour takes
place, the release of particles, the release of
bubbles, the influence, the collections of fish
around it as part of the biological response to
this object. All these things are involved. are
part of beginning to build up a model of how the
ocean puts together, even though they are
directed towards a specific military need, I
think. If you look at them not as a highly specified
task, but rather as, from the broader standpoint
of here as an object within the natural
environment, how does it make its presence known
and what are its influences? Then, of course, if
you look at it that way, it has not just the military
limitation. ONR allowed you to do these sorts of
things. It was one of the most...
ONR, I think, was one of the freest and most
valuable types of sponsorship that oceanography
has ever had. Do you think ONR is more
mission-oriented now than it was then? Oh, sure.
Sure, I think so. I hardly know what it... supply
kind of very little contact with it. I think it's
gotten very mission-oriented. Is there any
particular explanation for that? Oh, I think the
whole United States has never kind of quite
recovered from the more bangs for a buck or how many
philosophy. That is, a fixed objective towards
which you progress It never allows for the
unexpected to emerge, does it? The unexpected is
almost always more valuable than the expected,
because expected is something you obviously know
can exist. Unexpected can be unlimited in its
importance.
What about the magnesium rod release device in
1947? Oh, heavens.
I was trying to make a pressure gauge for measuring
waves in deep water and did so, but I needed to load
it in cockets. After it got to depth, I needed to
open up a reservoir so it flooded with gas, and I
needed something that was simple that would
release it. And Dean O'Brien said to me, as a matter
of fact, Dean O'Brien, the head of the engineering
school at Berkeley, said to me, Why don't you look
into magnesium? It makes a good little battery
with steel or brass. And so I put it together, and it
looked fine. Just held the valve open with a
magnesium wire, and after an easily calculable
time, it released. And that all led into looking at
magnesium batteries and magnesium as its power
source. OK. That's what I wanted to know. OK. What
about the torpedo net in 1947? Yeah. Yeah, that was
a more or less specific project. And that was one of
the few projects I ever worked with what was then
the Bureau of Yards and Docks, I think, in which
they had a great deal of trouble with torpedo nets
tearing apart. Well, a torpedo net is a very
strange object. manner in which trash is
distributed through it is complicated. But more
particularly, that was the first hint I had of
what's more recently developed into several
things called, for instance, the breakwater, in
that these big net floats behave very curiously in
the sea. And they behave very curiously because
they were non-Archimedean bodies, to use the word
improperly.
bodies on the sea surface that had much more
displacement than they had mass and free to move
with. So they were forced to move in an exaggerated
fashion. And this is one of the reasons that the
torpedo nets were torn apart, because the floats
were driven by something other than the orbital
velocities of the waves. And this put them out of
phase with the net that they were supporting. And
this is the first hint I got of, as you begin to get
larger and larger things in the ocean,
accelerated forces play the more dominant role
than surface forces. Does this end up later on then
also involved in the energy project? Oh, sure.
Yeah. Well, does it also end up... The principal
thing you see is, something that is a concept which
other people have probably understood much
better than I have. But as you go to these larger and
larger objects in a varying pressure field, like a
wave,
the smaller objects are driven by drag, ordinary
drag forces, hydrodynamic drag. And then Even
though you keep everything symmetrical and you
merely scale it up into larger and larger
dimensions, there's one aspect, and that's the
accelerated forces, that scales on a one-to-one
basis. That is, the forces are always equal to the
volume. In other words, the dimension to the third
power. where its surface forces go like the
dimension squared. And thus, when you begin to get
into very large objects, but not too large
objects, in the wave field, such as the big lakes or
the Texas Towers, an offshore crewing platform,
it's clear that they're driven far more by the
accelerated forces, which act on the total volume
of them, than by the surface forces. And you might
well forget the surface forces. And these are
aspects that are still forgotten.
For instance, in these big OTEC programs, where
you're starting to put very large, slow-moving
things in the ocean for ocean thermal energy
conversion, the people and very erudite people at
APL and Lockheed just totally forgot the fact that
they're mainly dealing with accelerations,
inertial forces. rather than the ordinary,
conventional, frictional hydrodynamic
dragons. And so they've made some mistakes.
See, one thing scales like the square of the
dimensions. The other scales like the cube of the
dimensions. And even though it's a trivial effect
at very small dimensions, it becomes a dominant on
a very large dimension, since it's going up like
the cube.
You've been out in the desert, and you've seen
these great boulders as big as a room that are way
out in the desert somewhere? Yes. How'd they get
there? They're obviously carried there by water.
Well, at the moment that a flood wave hits a boulder
like that, the crest of a flood wave hits a boulder,
the boulder is easily moved as a sand grain.
Because, you see, it's now at that moment subject
to volume forces that scale just exactly like its
weight. For frictional forces, it didn't care
less. Once the flood flow is established, the
boulder sits there. It's like a lead toad, of
course. But at that instant, when the crest comes,
it's as easily moved as a sand grain. So for an
instance, it's moved. And a succession of these,
and out it is, out in the desert, miles away. You
can't conceive of how it got there. This is all part
of the same phenomenology. And I think it's an
interesting one. And I believe I've capitalized
on it in a couple of cases. That came from the
submarine net problem, yes. OK. And what about the
thermopile wave meter? Well, I watched these.
These are all very old things.
That was a special problem, I think. I wanted to
see. if we couldn't establish a very simple wave
measuring device that could be put out to sea
simply by a landing craft, dropped by a landing
craft. So a beach master trying to bring landing
craft in through the surf could observe the
oncoming waves before they became breakers. on a
meter of some sort on the beach and guide the
landing craft into the lower breakers to come to
the surf zone. Now, it didn't need to be exact. All
it needed to be was relative correct. He would see
big waves coming in. He'd see the breakers. He'd
know they couldn't survive that. And then he'd see
a series of lower waves coming in. And he could
beckon them in at that point, see, or vector them in
with a radio.
It was the simplest device I could think of, a bag of
gas that's adiabatically heated and cooled by the
wave pressure in there and a simple little
thermopile inside, up against sea water on
conductive to sea water on the other side to make
the cold junction or the reference junction. And
it just responded to the waves. And he could see the
high ones, and he could see the low ones. That's all
he had to see. He didn't have to know how high they
were. He knew that the big ones were producing wave
breakers that He didn't want his craft to be in, and
you could tell him to retract or to dander at the
optimum times. That was the purpose of that whole
thing. All right. What about the Isaac's Kid
Midwater Troll? There's a case where Dr. Hubbs
came to me, and
he won. a net to really take the run deep fast and
take the bath pelagic fish and Lou Kidd and I worked
on that and I must say I think we lucked out on that
one because it's always been a bit strange to me
that we cut that we got that net hung we got that
diving vane made We got the bridles cut, and we took
it out to sea, and immediately we filled
beautifully, dove beautifully, went down deep,
and we could tow it at three, four thousand meters
at reasonable speeds.
Even today, if those bridles are cut a few inches
different, the damn thing doesn't work. I never
understood. We could have been so discouraged,
we'd never have followed it through. And I see that
thing all over the world, and that bridle is right
to the same inch. And it was pretty much of a thrill,
really, in those days. I remember those days quite
well. On our first trips out, we would make halls
that would, increased the number of specimens of
some rare fish in the museums of the world by 50. You
know, one haul.
When there had only been 10 in all the museums of the
world, we get 500 of the things. And of course, then
specimen after specimen, it was totally
unidentified. It was quite a thrill. We made a
20-foot one one time, rammed it into the bottom
through an axe and a parlous. Took one of the
greatest mid-bottom trawls that anybody ever
took.
Rare brachiopods and glass sponges. That's
probably considered in terms of oceanography
your most important and famous invention. Would
you agree with that? Oh, I don't. I wouldn't try to
judge it. It certainly has been very broadly
spread around the world, and I kind of suffer from
it to some extent because I go to some outlandish
place, and that's what I'm known for, you see, the
Isaac Kidd Midwether Tronc. Well, I'm really
trying to edge your question until you're
unfairly, so let me ask you directly. That is,
if... you should like to name what you consider
your major accomplishment, what would you name?
You mean something specific? Something
specific, yeah. If you just wanted, you know, it
was always said John Adams wanted such and such
card upon his tombstone. If you just had to be
remembered for one thing, what would you like to be
remembered for? Oh, good heavens, I'd hate to be
remembered for one thing.
Well, I'd rather think this whole approach of this
Dynamic breakwater is going to be a considerable
breakthrough. I think it's going to
revolutionize the whole method of defending
ourselves against the destructive influences of
waves, beach erosion, harbors. I think it has the
potential of allowing the
defense of our eroding coastlines. of protecting
structures offshore, of making harbors
of refuge in the open sea, of protecting small
beaches and fishing villages in remote places in a
way that can be afforded,
so that people can pull their primitive boats out
over the beach and get themselves some fish.
make swimming beaches in places where surf now
makes it essentially impossible, and on and on.
There's quite a different approach to harbor
protection, for example, than these damn Robomon
breakwater And of course, it's totally the
opposite direction. It's interesting to
conceive that no matter how long you developed a
rubble mound breakwater, you'd never come up with
the idea of putting the lightest possible thing in
the ocean. And it takes a 180 degree shift to do
that. And it works on a different principle.
I think maybe that's it. I expect to see the iceberg
really solve some problems. I think the Israelis
would do it now. They don't really have the money.
But they would do it, except the minimum iceberg
they could bring is too big. It covers the whole
damn state with three feet of water. The Arabs are
going to do it, or so I've announced. And it
certainly is a natural one for them. The US is too
followed up, I think, to do anything quite so
dramatic.